README.md, before:

# Data Summarization & Charting Agent

Offline-first tool that lets a user drop CSV or Excel files, ask natural language questions, and instantly get summaries or publication-ready charts. All computation, storage and LLM inference stay on the local machine.

---

## 1. Problem Statement

Teams often need quick exploratory analysis without sending sensitive data to the cloud. Analysts waste time writing repetitive pandas code or plotting boilerplate. This project provides a local UI that understands a user question and generates the right pandas operations and matplotlib charts automatically.

---

## 2. Core Capabilities (Target)

### 2.1 MVP (Phase 1)

- Upload CSV or XLSX up to a configurable size.
- Preview head, column types and null counts.
- Basic descriptive stats and summaries.
- Manual chart builder for common plots: line, bar, histogram, box, scatter.
- Download charts as PNG and tables as CSV.

### 2.2 Natural Language Layer (Phase 2)

- Ask: "Show sales trend for last 3 months" or "Summarise revenue by region".
- Local LLM parses intent and generates safe pandas + matplotlib code.
- Sandbox execution with guardrails (AST checks, allowed API whitelist).

### 2.3 Convenience Features (Phase 3)

- Auto date parsing and time range helpers.
- Column suggestion and type coercion hints.
- Chart theming presets and dark/light toggle.
- Session history of prompts, code and outputs.
- One click export of a report (PDF or PPTX) with charts and key stats.

### 2.4 Optional Extras (Phase 4)

- Vector store (ChromaDB or FAISS) to remember previously analysed files.
- Multi file join and compare workflows.
- Plug-in system for custom transforms or domain templates (finance, retail, logistics).
- Role based access on a LAN deployment (FastAPI backend + auth).

---

## 3. Tech Stack

| Layer       | Choice (initial)                               | Notes                                                |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| UI          | Streamlit                                      | Fast to prototype. Can add FastAPI + React later.    |
| Data engine | pandas, numpy                                  | Mature ecosystem.                                    |
| Charts      | matplotlib                                     | Requirement. Others optional later (plotly, altair). |
| LLM runtime | llama.cpp or ollama                            | Runs Mistral, Phi, Qwen etc locally.                 |
| Code runner | Python sandbox (restricted exec or subprocess) | Prevent arbitrary code execution.                    |
| Packaging   | Docker, docker compose                         | Deterministic environment.                           |
| Dev comfort | VS Code Dev Containers or local venv           | Your choice.                                         |

---

## 4. High Level Architecture

1. **Frontend (Streamlit)**
   - File uploader, prompt box, chart and table viewers.
2. **Controller**
   - Routes user intent: direct UI selections or NL prompt.
3. **LLM Interpreter** (Phase 2)
   - Prompt template + few shot examples -> pandas/matplotlib code.
4. **Safe Executor**
   - Static analysis of code AST.
   - Execute in a jailed namespace with only approved imports.
5. **Result Renderer**
   - DataFrame -> table, fig -> PNG buffer.
6. **Persistence**
   - Cache datasets and generated artifacts in local folders.

---

## 5. Typical User Flow

1. User drops `sales_aug.xlsx`.
2. App shows preview and summary.
3. User types: "Compare average bill amount by region for Q2".
4. LLM returns Python snippet. Safe executor runs it.
5. App displays a bar chart and a summary table.
6. User downloads the PNG and the CSV.

---

## 6. Getting Started

### 6.1 Prerequisites

- Docker Desktop or Docker Engine
- VS Code (optional)
- For local run without Docker: Python 3.11

### 6.2 One line Docker run

```bash
docker compose up --build
```

Visit [http://localhost:8501](http://localhost:8501)

### 6.3 Local venv (no Docker)

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/Scripts/activate  # Windows: .venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
pip install -r requirements.txt
streamlit run app/ui_streamlit.py
```

### 6.4 Makefile Shortcuts

```bash
# run local app with venv
make dev

# format and lint
make fmt
make lint

# run docker compose
make docker
```


### 6.5 FastAPI server

```bash
uvicorn app.api:app --reload
```

This exposes endpoints like `/upload`, `/summary/{id}`, `/chart/{id}`, `/nl2code/{id}` and `/run_code/{id}`.

---

## 7. Repository Layout

```
root/
├── app/
│   ├── ui_streamlit.py        # Streamlit entry point
│   └── core/
│       ├── file_loader.py     # CSV/XLSX ingestion
│       ├── analysis.py        # Simple summaries
│       ├── charts.py          # Matplotlib rendering helpers
│       └── llm_driver.py      # NL -> code bridge (placeholder)
├── data/                      # User uploaded data (gitignored)
├── Dockerfile
├── docker-compose.yml
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

---

## 8. Roadmap Checklist

- **Data Prep Wizards**
  - Column type fixer (int/float/date)
  - Missing value heatmap
  - Quick outlier detection (IQR / z-score)
- **Chart UX**
  - Themes (dark/light)
  - Save chart presets
  - Facet grids for bar/hist in addition to line

---

## 9. Local LLM Integration Plan (Sketch)

1. Run `ollama run mistral:7b-instruct` or llama.cpp server.
2. Prompt template:
   - System: "You translate English questions into safe pandas and matplotlib code. Only use columns provided."
   - Few shot examples mapping question -> code.
3. Parse model output, strip fenced code.
4. Validate AST for allowed nodes (Import, Call, Assign, etc.).
5. Execute and capture DataFrame or Figure objects.
6. Return result to UI.

---

## 10. Security and Safety Notes

- Never execute arbitrary code from the model without checks.
- No internet calls from within analysis code.
- Uploaded data never leaves the host unless user exports it.
- Option to run in an air gapped machine.

---

## 11. Contribution Guidelines (future)

- Use conventional commits. Example: `feat: add histogram chart`
- Open an issue before large feature work.
- Write small tests for any pure functions in `core`.

---

## 12. License

Choose a permissive OSS license (MIT or Apache-2.0) unless you have constraints. Add `LICENSE` file accordingly.

---

## 13. Credits

Initial concept and implementation:&#x20;

---

Happy building.

Commit message:

feat: add React frontend prototype

README.md, after:

# Data Summarization & Charting Agent

Offline-first tool that lets a user drop CSV or Excel files, ask natural language questions, and instantly get summaries or publication-ready charts. All computation, storage and LLM inference stay on the local machine.

---

## 1. Problem Statement

Teams often need quick exploratory analysis without sending sensitive data to the cloud. Analysts waste time writing repetitive pandas code or plotting boilerplate. This project provides a local UI that understands a user question and generates the right pandas operations and matplotlib charts automatically.

---

## 2. Core Capabilities (Target)

### 2.1 MVP (Phase 1)

- Upload CSV or XLSX up to a configurable size.
- Preview head, column types and null counts.
- Basic descriptive stats and summaries.
- Manual chart builder for common plots: line, bar, histogram, box, scatter.
- Download charts as PNG and tables as CSV.

### 2.2 Natural Language Layer (Phase 2)

- Ask: "Show sales trend for last 3 months" or "Summarise revenue by region".
- Local LLM parses intent and generates safe pandas + matplotlib code.
- Sandbox execution with guardrails (AST checks, allowed API whitelist).

### 2.3 Convenience Features (Phase 3)

- Auto date parsing and time range helpers.
- Column suggestion and type coercion hints.
- Chart theming presets and dark/light toggle.
- Session history of prompts, code and outputs.
- One click export of a report (PDF or PPTX) with charts and key stats.

### 2.4 Optional Extras (Phase 4)

- Vector store (ChromaDB or FAISS) to remember previously analysed files.
- Multi file join and compare workflows.
- Plug-in system for custom transforms or domain templates (finance, retail, logistics).
- Role based access on a LAN deployment (FastAPI backend + auth).

---

## 3. Tech Stack

| Layer       | Choice (initial)                               | Notes                                                |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| UI          | Streamlit                                      | Fast to prototype. Can add FastAPI + React later.    |
| Data engine | pandas, numpy                                  | Mature ecosystem.                                    |
| Charts      | matplotlib                                     | Requirement. Others optional later (plotly, altair). |
| LLM runtime | llama.cpp or ollama                            | Runs Mistral, Phi, Qwen etc locally.                 |
| Code runner | Python sandbox (restricted exec or subprocess) | Prevent arbitrary code execution.                    |
| Packaging   | Docker, docker compose                         | Deterministic environment.                           |
| Dev comfort | VS Code Dev Containers or local venv           | Your choice.                                         |

---

## 4. High Level Architecture

1. **Frontend (Streamlit)**
   - File uploader, prompt box, chart and table viewers.
2. **Controller**
   - Routes user intent: direct UI selections or NL prompt.
3. **LLM Interpreter** (Phase 2)
   - Prompt template + few shot examples -> pandas/matplotlib code.
4. **Safe Executor**
   - Static analysis of code AST.
   - Execute in a jailed namespace with only approved imports.
5. **Result Renderer**
   - DataFrame -> table, fig -> PNG buffer.
6. **Persistence**
   - Cache datasets and generated artifacts in local folders.

---

## 5. Typical User Flow

1. User drops `sales_aug.xlsx`.
2. App shows preview and summary.
3. User types: "Compare average bill amount by region for Q2".
4. LLM returns Python snippet. Safe executor runs it.
5. App displays a bar chart and a summary table.
6. User downloads the PNG and the CSV.

---

## 6. Getting Started

### 6.1 Prerequisites

- Docker Desktop or Docker Engine
- VS Code (optional)
- For local run without Docker: Python 3.11

### 6.2 One line Docker run

```bash
docker compose up --build
```

Visit [http://localhost:8501](http://localhost:8501)

### 6.3 Local venv (no Docker)

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/Scripts/activate  # Windows: .venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
pip install -r requirements.txt
streamlit run app/ui_streamlit.py
```

### 6.4 Makefile Shortcuts

```bash
# run local app with venv
make dev

# format and lint
make fmt
make lint

# run docker compose
make docker
```


### 6.5 FastAPI server

```bash
uvicorn app.api:app --reload
```

This exposes endpoints like `/upload`, `/summary/{id}`, `/chart/{id}`, `/nl2code/{id}` and `/run_code/{id}`.

---

## 7. Repository Layout

```
root/
├── app/
│   ├── ui_streamlit.py        # Streamlit entry point
│   └── core/
│       ├── file_loader.py     # CSV/XLSX ingestion
│       ├── analysis.py        # Simple summaries
│       ├── charts.py          # Matplotlib rendering helpers
│       └── llm_driver.py      # NL -> code bridge (placeholder)
├── data/                      # User uploaded data (gitignored)
├── Dockerfile
├── docker-compose.yml
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

---

## 8. Roadmap Checklist

- **Data Prep Wizards**
  - Column type fixer (int/float/date)
  - Missing value heatmap
  - Quick outlier detection (IQR / z-score)
- **Chart UX**
  - Themes (dark/light)
  - Save chart presets
  - Facet grids for bar/hist in addition to line

---

## 9. Local LLM Integration Plan (Sketch)

1. Run `ollama run mistral:7b-instruct` or llama.cpp server.
2. Prompt template:
   - System: "You translate English questions into safe pandas and matplotlib code. Only use columns provided."
   - Few shot examples mapping question -> code.
3. Parse model output, strip fenced code.
4. Validate AST for allowed nodes (Import, Call, Assign, etc.).
5. Execute and capture DataFrame or Figure objects.
6. Return result to UI.

---

## 10. Security and Safety Notes

- Never execute arbitrary code from the model without checks.
- No internet calls from within analysis code.
- Uploaded data never leaves the host unless user exports it.
- Option to run in an air gapped machine.

---

## 11. Contribution Guidelines (future)

- Use conventional commits. Example: `feat: add histogram chart`
- Open an issue before large feature work.
- Write small tests for any pure functions in `core`.

---

## 12. License

Choose a permissive OSS license (MIT or Apache-2.0) unless you have constraints. Add `LICENSE` file accordingly.

---

## 13. Credits

Initial concept and implementation:&#x20;

---
## 14. React UI Prototype

An experimental React + Vite frontend lives under `frontend/`. It uses
MUI components together with Recharts for interactive charts. Run `npm install` and then `npm run dev` inside that directory to start
the development server.


Happy building.
